We need to estimate the (SNP-based) heritability of the assessed phenotypes (ie. the proportion of variation in the trait that can be explained by genetic variation in the population [all SNPs]) before the GWAS is ran. The fastGWA model already estimates it before running the GWAS, it is one of the outputs. 

https://www.nature.com/articles/s41588-020-0600-y

https://www.nature.com/articles/s43586-021-00056-9 Understanding trait genetic architecture
Determining the genetic architecture of a trait involves estimating the number of causal variants, their corresponding effect sizes and their frequencies, and allows the estimation of heritability, or the proportion of variation in the trait that can be explained by genetic variation in the population. Modern large-scale human genetics data sets commonly estimate heritability in genotyped data sets of unrelated individuals. There are numerous statistical methods and computational tools for quantifying heritability https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/earth-and-environmental-science-transactions-of-royal-society-of-edinburgh/article/abs/xv-correlation-between-relatives-on-the-supposition-of-mendelian-inheritance/A60675052E0FB78C561F66C670BC75DE. Approaches are typically delineated into broad-sense heritability (H2) — which measures the fraction of phenotypic variation explained by both additive and dominance effects — and narrow-sense heritability (h2), which considers additive effects only172. Population-based methods can estimate SNP-based heritability using individual-level genotype and phenotype data; for example, genome-based restricted maximum likelihood, as implemented in genome-wide complex trait analysis173, partitions variance component models with a genomic relationship matrix, which allows the regression of the level of phenotypic similarity on the level of genotypic similarity. Alternatively, linkage disequilibrium score regression can be used to estimate SNP-based heritability from GWAS summary statistics and a panel of linkage disequilibrium scores174. Importantly, SNP-based heritability only measures the variance explained by additive effects of the genotyped or imputed SNPs. Data discussed in a recent preprint article have highlighted the importance of including rare variants when assessing SNP-based heritability175. Indeed, whereas common variants contribute more to SNP-based heritability in a population176, rare variants can nevertheless have large effects in individuals177. Regardless of approach, heritability is importantly not a fixed entity and varies with age178, sex179, social factors180, phenotype precision and other complex factors. Ancestry heterogeneity is also important to consider, as population structure can inflate heritability estimates181.

Although it is informative to know heritability for a single trait, it is often more useful to understand the genetic relationships between multiple traits, as SNPs are often associated with many, sometimes seemingly unrelated, phenotypes8,182. Both linkage disequilibrium score regression and genome-wide complex trait analysis allow the estimation of genetic correlations, or the extent to which genetic variants that account for a trait are also important for another trait, provided that the effects are in the same direction. Tools such as superGNOVA183, ρ-HESS184 and LAVA185 from a recent preprint article allow the estimation of local correlations, determining which specific genomic regions exert genetic effects on the correlated phenotypes in the same or opposing directions. Genetic correlations should be interpreted in the context of SNP-based heritabilities; for example, if these are low for the respective phenotypes, genetic correlation is not expected to play a major part in explaining why two traits correlate at the phenotypic level. Further, genetic correlation does not provide information about causation between two traits. Indeed, genetic correlation can be caused by vertical pleiotropy, where trait A causes trait B; horizontal pleiotropy, where a variant directly influences two traits; linkage disequilibrium-induced horizontal pleiotropy, where two different variants that are in linkage disequilibrium each influence one of two traits; or polygenicity-induced pleiotropy, where multiple variants influence both traits and the underlying patterns are a mix of the above186.



Heritability Estimation
https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/GENESIS/inst/doc/assoc_test.html#overview
It is often of interest to estimate the proportion of the total phenotype variability explained by the entire set of genotyped SNPs avaialable; this provides an estimate of the narrow sense heritability of the trait. One method for estimating heritability is to use the variance component estimates from the null mixed model. GENESIS includes the varCompCI function for computing the proportion of variance explained by each random effect along with 95% confidence intervals.

varCompCI(nullmod, prop = TRUE)
##             Proportion   Lower 95  Upper 95
## V_A           0.110543 -0.2190884 0.4401745
## V_resid.var   0.889457  0.5598255 1.2190884
the first argument is the output from fitNullModel
prop is a logical indicator of whether the point estimates and confidence intervals should be returned as the proportion of total variability explained (TRUE) or on the orginal scale (FALSE)
When additional random effects are included in the model (e.g. a shared household effect), varCompCI will also return the proportion of variability explained by each of these components.

Note: varCompCI can not compute proportions of variance explained when heterogeneous residual variances are used in the null model (i.e. group.var is used in fitNullModel). Confidence intervals can still be computed for the variance component estimates on the original scale by setting prop = FALSE.

Note: variance component estimates are not interpretable for binary phenotypes when fit using the PQL method implemented in fitNullModel; proportions of variance explained should not be calculated for these models.

5References
